---
title: "In Praise of Visual Representation: An Inquiry into Text Analysis and Network Visualization for Charting Scientific Communities"
year: 2024
venue: "Visual Communication"
type: "journal"
author: "Dario Rodighiero"
volume: "23"
issue: "3"
doi: "https://doi.org/10.1177/14703572241248408"
img: "@publications/In-Praise-of-Visual-Representation.webp"
thumb: "in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_003.webp"
img_width: 700
img_height: 525
figures: true
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
---
This article provides a visual investigation into scientific communities through the lens of language. Inspired by actor-network theory, the study examines how individuals establish connections through shared vocabularies and, consequently, how communities organize themselves into linguistic groups. Using scientific texts to map the lexical dimension, the premise posits that research communities can be visually represented by their members and the words they employ, favouring the comprehension of social structures. The research draws from a decade-long personal experimentation with language-based visual models, to explore how research communities appear according to their lexicon, in which each individual is intricately intertwined. Employing cutting-edge techniques of text analysis and network visualization, the study analyses, organizes and maps scientific communities, clustering individuals into thematic groups based on their language use. The findings are presented through a series of projects that delve into the analytical power of images and unveil novel visual methods to better understand the spatial dynamics of language and communities.

<!--more-->

In the early 1990s, the philosopher Ernst von Glasersfeld explored the cybernetic dimension of language, focusing on the concept of self-regulation as a mechanism to improve communication while conversations take place. Von Glasersfeld borrowed this concept from the psychologist Jean Piaget who observed how “intelligence organizes the world by organizing itself”, suggesting that knowledge has an adaptive form that changes according to the actors taking part in it (Von Glasersfeld 1992: 3). By reinterpreting Piaget’s maxim in cybernetic, Von Glasersfeld emphasized that individuals comprehend each other through an endless cycle of language adaptation, whereby communication becomes increasingly effective through dialogue. When a linguistic circle reaches what Piaget (1975) terms “equilibration”, two individuals have reached a common language that enhances mutual understanding.

This text builds on the idea that the cybernetic loop of mutual understanding can be applied to communities in the process of finding a common language. Based on this foundation, the study aims to represent communities by utilizing techniques of text analysis (Manning and Schütze 1999) and network visualization (Lima 2011) to create novel forms of organizational charts that have not undergone significant enhancements since Willard Brinton’s survey ([1914] 1919). This new form of organizational charts, or more broadly visual methods, will allow for a more profound understanding of language-based communities. The premise is that language can be regarded as a form of connectivity that transcends barriers imposed by hierarchies or seniority, thereby facilitating a more democratic method of mapping individuals within groups (Rodighiero 2021).

Unlike individual conversations, measuring and visualizing the language of a group presents greater challenges due to the complexity of linguistic connectivity. If we imagine a network composed of individuals and each word they use, then the number of edges surpasses the limits of imagination. In such a context, scientific communities represent a fascinating territory to explore. In diverse venues, the scholar activity leaves behind discernible textual information, which Tim Ingold (2007: 43) refers to as traces and Bruno Latour (2014) refers to as digital traces. Specifically, textual traces offer valuable opportunities for analysing and visualizing the linguistic dimensionality, thus enhancing our understanding of self-regulated groups. This process can be achieved through the creation and interpretation of images that represent these communities through texts. Graphic design holds a significant role in the process as the linguistic connectivity is intricate and difficult to comprehend without the aid of visual aids. Recent technological developments have left room for innovative studies that could shed light on linguistic self-regulation, revealing the linguistic structure of scientific communities.

Over the centuries, linguistics has been the subject of numerous investigations by scholars from various fields, including Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky, to name a few (Matthews 2003). The middle of the 20th century saw the emergence of a radical statement within this scientific community, arguing that words were not coming with meanings (Finch 2000: 143). For instance, according to the linguist W. Nelson Francis (1967: 119), “Words do not have meanings; people have meanings for words.” Similarly, the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote that “speaking of language is part of an activity, or a form of life” (Wittgenstein [1952] 2009: 15). It can be said that words acquire meaning through their contextual use, rather than solely relying on definitions. This fundamental understanding leads us to the crux of this article: words possess meaning only when they are employed within specific contexts, rendering the definition of words inherently tied to their use and not to written definitions.

The prospect of eliminating dictionaries, taxonomies and other classification systems – caused by the recent advancements in artificial intelligence exemplified by Large Language Models (Amaratunga 2023) – makes it possible to start conceiving self-regulatory classification systems based on book contents rather than classification systems, in a sort of living classification as predicted by Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star (1999: 326), on the last page of their book *Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences*:

> Seemingly purely technical issues like how to name things and how to store data in fact constitute much of human interaction and much of what we come to know as natural. We have argued that a key for the future is to produce flexible classifications whose users are aware of their political and organizational dimensions and which explicitly retain traces of their construction. In the best of all possible worlds, at any given moment, the past could be reordered to better reflect multiple constituencies now and then. Only then will we be able to fully learn the lessons of the past. In this same optimal world, we could tune our classifications to reflect new institutional arrangements or personal trajectories – reconfigure the world on the fly. The only good classification is a living classification.

In a context of self-regulatory classifications and complex language dynamics, the convergence with network visualizations comes naturally. Networks, indeed, prove to be valuable visual tools for finding patterns and insights in linguistic structures. Grounded in the tenets of actor-network theory (Callon and Latour 2017), this text embraces the assumption that human activity is deeply interwoven with nonhuman actors, which can be found in every single word used during conversation and writing. In terms of representation (Greimas 1987: 106), individuals find themselves intricately linked to words, which build with humans a mutual relationship that crystallizes the social structure of language (Ferigato et al. 2009). In this relational perspective, individuals are embodied by the words they employ. The fundamental concept behind this study is that individuals can be effectively depicted through their usage of words and network visualizations serve as a potent means of revealing the linguistic interconnectedness that pervades communities without diminishing the significance of everyone.

Building upon this premise, the present text unveils a series of experiments focusing on representing scientific communities through their texts (i.e. conference papers, abstracts, presentations, etc.). Using advanced techniques of Natural Language Processing (Manning and Schütze 1999), the documents composing a corpus are transformed into linguistic vectors that allow the measurement of linguistic similarity between scholars (Mikolov et al. 2013). The multidimensional vectors are then reduced to two dimensions through dimensionality reduction through libraries such as t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) or UMAP (McInnes et al. 2018). These values can be seen as a form of mapping, which can be customized by graphic-design into a network visualization (Lima 2011). The outcome is a visual image that facilitates the reader’s hermeneutic act of interpretation (Caputo 2018). Images not only abstract the intricate web of academic dynamics but they are also capable of contributing to a profound comprehension of their linguistic patterns. These visual methods offer a new perspective on the intricate interplay between language, individuals and their whole communities.

The practice of representing scientific communities belongs to the larger field of organization theory (Hatch 2011), where organizational charts cover a key role for planning. Organizational charts provide a distinct perspective on medium and large organizations, facilitating efficient coordination between individuals and top-down management (Hatch and Cunliffe 2013: 271–279). However, they often rely on a simplistic design that fails to capture the intricate dynamics of human interactions by representing complexity with oversimplified diagrams (Rodighiero 2021: 28–31). Recognizing this limitation, the Affinity Map was developed to rethink the simplistic design of organizational charts with a richer and more comprehensive mapping through the lens of collaboration (Rodighiero 2018, 2021; Rodighiero, Kaplan, and Beaude 2018). Inspired by Gilles Deleuze’s concept of actual and virtual (Deleuze and Parnet 2007: 148–152), the Affinity Map serves as a visual model describing how scholars work together and can potentially collaborate in the future, similar to a recommendation system (Schrage 2020). In particular, the visual model seeks to reveal the latent laboratory potential – defined as virtuality by Deleuze – through accurate text analysis of scientific literature, measuring the linguistic similarity between units.

The Affinity Map (see Figure 1) uses a hexagonal grid system to visually represent the ENAC faculty at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). Laboratories are denoted as nodes and the connections between them illustrate various academic collaborations. The final arrangement is determined by a force-layout algorithm (Bostock et al. 2011; Meeks 2015: 175–203), which positions laboratories on the Cartesian plane. The actual collaborations are described by lines representing collaborations in terms of advising, publications and teaching; on the other hand, the potential affinities are embodied by shared keywords listed between laboratories. This linguistic dimension is conceived to foster interdisciplinary within the faculty: each laboratory’s publications are computed through the TF-IDF algorithm of text analysis, which returns a metric that represents the lexical similarity between units, discarding the most common terms used by the whole community (Manning and Schütze 1999: 541–544). The map’s design utilizes different sizes and colours for edges and colours, making it easier to distinguish between strengths of relationships (thicker lines signify stronger collaborations) and their relative institute (red for architecture, blue for civil engineering and green for environmental engineering). The hexagonal layout is particularly effective in organizing numerous elements in a clear readable manner. The overall visual design of the Affinity Map not only enhances aesthetic appeal but also significantly facilitates comprehension of intricate academic networks (Rodighiero 2018, 2021; Rodighiero, Kaplan, and Beaude 2018).

{% include figure.html src="/images/in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_001.webp" caption="Figure 1. The Affinity Map is a model for mapping academic dynamics, showcasing actual collaborations (advising, publications and teaching) and affinities between laboratories based on lexical analysis. A hexagonal grid allows for placing shared keywords between laboratories, while the network arrangement is determined by a combination of attraction forces. Although the visualization was maintained until 2023, the code is still available on GitHub at https://github.com/rodighiero/Affinity-Map" %}

The Affinity Map model was so effective (Rodighiero 2021: 111–119) that it inspired a series of mapping experiments with smaller scientific communities. This research stage was conducted in the field of digital humanities, finding the appropriate setting in two conferences organized by Associazione per l’Informatica Umanistica e la Cultura Digitale (AIUCD) and the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO). The network visualizations created for these events in 2020 (see Figures 2 and 3) helped attendees to orientate in the panels by showing speakers according to their textual similarity (Moon and Rodighiero 2020; Rodighiero, Crompton, and Ning 2020). Visualizations highlighted the most relevant keywords extracted from the abstracts through text analysis, similarly to the Affinity Map. The web-based interfaces published on GitHub allowed conference attendees to zoom into visualizations to identify the names of speakers, accessing more information about the presentations. These interactive visualizations offered a potent means of comprehending the linguistic intricacy that regulates specialized scientific communities, facilitating a more profound understanding of the field’s dynamics.

{% include figure.html src="/images/in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_002.webp" caption="Figure 2. The network visualization of AIUCD conference showcases connections between speakers based on their most relevant keywords. This map that presents the linguistic landscape of the digital humanities’ community in Italy, borrows elevation lines from cartography to indicate the density of speakers. The code and the visualization (tested on Chrome) are accessible on GitHub at https://github.com/rodighiero/AIUCD2020" %}

{% include figure.html src="/images/in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_003.webp" caption="Figure 3. The interactive application for the ADHO conference illustrates the digital humanities international community through text analysis. Differently from the AIUCD example, this network visualization introduces a higher level of abstraction to facilitate distant reading: the most relevant keywords of the scientific community are brought to the fore to offer precise entry points to zoom into details. The two levels of visualization can coexist thanks to a sophisticated system of fading. The visualization is available on GitHub at https://rodighiero.github.io/DH2020/" %}

The visual methods described above gained significant relevance during the COVID-19 pandemic when scientific conferences moved online. Notably, the Digital Humanities 2020 conference served as a first testing ground for the efficacy of this technique in a field that understands the potential of data visualization. While it remains difficult to quantify the exact impact of the map, the exchange between users proved intriguing (DH2020@Ottawa 2020), revealing a sense of community among scholars (Rodighiero and Cellard 2019), echoing from the notion of mutual recognition already developed by Paul Ricœur (2005). This engagement underscores the map’s utility not just as an analytical tool but as a means of fostering the community among researchers, even in the absence of physical interaction. The visualizations became a helpful component in developing ties, demonstrating the importance of digital tools in navigating the challenges posed by the pandemic. This scenario also highlights the significance of data visualization in academic meta-discourse, especially in times that demand innovation in communication and collaboration methods.

During the pandemic, the same method was tested to represent scientists working on the crisis (Rodighiero, Wandl-Vogt, and Carsenat 2021, 2022). The resulting image (see Figure 4) showcases the most active scientists engaged in pandemic-related research, highlighting the prominent themes that emerged from their paper abstracts. Interestingly, those themes did not always align with the topics receiving attention from the media, revealing a fascinating discrepancy between scientific focus and public discourse. Examples of this discrepancy were seen in the extensive literature concerning pregnancy and mental anxiety. The visual representation of Covid-19 research emphasizes the dedication and contributions of the scientific community in tackling the challenges posed by the pandemic, underscoring their commitment to advancing knowledge in the critical situation. The recognition received from Newcastle University through the DH Award for the best data visualization underscores the value of the method in capturing the community of scientists during this unprecedented time.

{% include figure.html src="/images/in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_004.webp" caption="Figure 4. This visualization presents a macroscopic overview of the most active researchers during the COVID-19 crisis, mapped by lexical similarity. It presents together the essence of collaborative efforts and thematic diversity, underscoring the commitment to mitigate the pandemic’s impact. In comparison with the previous examples, this version provides a more accurate distribution of forefront keywords but limits the number of nodes because of the graphics-intensive workloads. The visualization is accessible on GitHub at https://rodighiero.github.io/COVID-19/" %}

The visual method underwent refinement in terms of programming and graphic design. In 2021, for the conference of the Society for Philosophy and Technology (SPT), text analysis was rewritten in Python, opting for a more accurate language model offered by spaCy (Honnibal et al. [2014] 2024), and dimensionality reduction was used for the spatialization, finding in UMAP an optimal solution (McInnes et al. 2018) (see Figure 5). This latter technical advancement gave the possibility of rethinking the foreground layer of keywords, which was replaced by more readable word clouds to represent the content of the clusters created by word frequency. This approach better described clusters by emphasizing the identity of thematic groups instead of individual edges. Attendees found this visual presentation to be highly valuable for exploring the conference and gaining a tangible image of the scientific community working at the intersection of philosophy and science (Rodighiero and Romele 2022).

{% include figure.html src="/images/in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_005.webp" caption="Figure 5. This visualization shows the evolution of the visual model in a case study concerning the SPT conference. Representing clusters with word clouds offers a more abstract way to visualize trending themes within the community. The visualization is accessible on GitHub at https://rodighiero.github.io/SPT2021/" %}

In conclusion, this text presents a series of experiments that explore the potential of information design in analysing scientific communities. The intersection of network visualization and text analysis creates novel images for representing scientific communities. This visual method has larger fields of application, though. Library collections and text archives offer interesting material for testing the model on questions related to classification. An interesting prototype was recently developed for the PAP paper manuscripts by the philosopher Charles S. Peirce (Picca et al. 2023). Emphasizing the capacity to organize knowledge into thematic clusters, the lexical mapping can potentially overcome the static classification systems used in libraries, opting for a knowledge self-organization (see Figure 6). These visual methods present real opportunities for exploring and understanding the intricate structures of language in corpora. By harnessing the power of visualization and text analysis, researchers can unlock more in-depth insights into linguistic complexity and foster visual exploration.

{% include figure.html src="/images/in-praise-of-visual-representation-an-inquiry-into-text-analysis-and-network-visualization-for-charting-scientific-communities/fig_006.webp" caption="Figure 6. This figure introduces a web-based application showcasing a UMAP visualization that organizes the PAP manuscript pages into a coherent visual classification. By incorporating advanced graphical elements, the application transforms textual analysis into an intuitive visual map, revealing underlying thematic clusters through word clouds. This innovative representation allows users to navigate Peirce’s manuscript in a novel way, offering insights into the manuscript’s thematic structure and enhancing the exploration of its complex ideas. The code and the visualization are accessible on GitHub at https://github.com/rodighiero/Charles-S-Peirce-PAP" %}

## References

- Amaratunga, Thimira. 2023. *Understanding Large Language Models: Learning Their Underlying Concepts and Technologies*. Berkeley, CA: Apress.
- Bostock, Michael, Vadim Ogievetsky, and Jeffrey Heer. 2011. “D3: Data-Driven Documents.” *IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics* 17 (12): 2301–9. [doi:10.1109/TVCG.2011.185](https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2011.185).
- Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. 1999. *Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Brinton, Willard Cope. (1914) 1919. *Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts*. New York: The Engineering Magazine Company.
- Callon, Michel, and Bruno Latour. 2017. “Unscrewing the Big Leviathan: How Actors Macro-Structure Reality and How Sociologists Help Them to Do So.” In *Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Toward an Integration of Micro- and Macro-Sociologies*, edited by Karin Knorr-Cetina and Aaron Victor Cicourel, 277–303. Abingdon: Routledge.
- Caputo, John D. 2018. *Hermeneutics: Facts and Interpretation in the Age of Information*. London: Pelican Books.
- Deleuze, Gilles, and Claire Parnet. 2007. *Dialogues II*. Rev. ed. European Perspectives. New York: Columbia University Press.
- DH2020@Ottawa [@DH2020_Ottawa]. 2020. “How Are the People, Ideas, and Methods of #DH2020 Connected? Have a Look at @dariorodighiero’s Remarkable ‘Cartography of DH2020’ Visualization.” Twitter, July 20. [twitter.com/DH2020_Ottawa/status/1285255169689739269](https://twitter.com/DH2020_Ottawa/status/1285255169689739269).
- Ferigato, Carlo, Giuseppe Merlo, Daniela Panfili, et al. 2009. “Role of Thesauri in a Scientific Organisation.” In *Networks of Design: Proceedings of the 2008 Annual International Conference of the Design History Society (UK)*, edited by Jonathan Glynne et al., 301–9. Boca Raton, FL: Universal-Publishers.
- Finch, Geoffrey. 2000. *Linguistic Terms and Concepts*. London: Macmillan Education.
- Francis, W. Nelson. 1967. *The English Language: An Introduction*. 2nd ed. London: English Universities Press.
- Greimas, Algirdas Julien. 1987. *On Meaning: Selected Writings in Semiotic Theory*. Theory and History of Literature 38. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Hatch, Mary Jo. 2011. *Organizations: A Very Short Introduction*. Very Short Introductions 264. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Hatch, Mary Jo, and Ann L. Cunliffe. 2013. *Organization Theory: Modern, Symbolic, and Postmodern Perspectives*. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Honnibal, Matthew, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Landeghem, et al. (2014) 2024. “spaCy: Industrial-Strength Natural Language Processing in Python.” Python.
- Ingold, Tim. 2007. *Lines: A Brief History*. Abingdon: Routledge.
- Latour, Bruno. 2014. “Rematerializing Humanities: Thanks to Digital Traces.” Presented at the Digital Humanities Conference, Lausanne.
- Lima, Manuel. 2011. *Visual Complexity: Mapping Patterns of Information*. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
- Manning, Christopher D., and Hinrich Schütze. 1999. *Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Matthews, Peter H. 2003. *Linguistics: A Very Short Introduction*. Very Short Introductions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- McInnes, Leland, John Healy, and James Melville. 2018. “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction.” arXiv. [doi:10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426).
- Meeks, Elijah. 2015. *D3.js in Action*. Shelter Island, NY: Manning.
- Mikolov, Tomas, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. “Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space.” arXiv. [doi:10.48550/arXiv.1301.3781](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1301.3781).
- Moon, Chloe Ye Eun, and Dario Rodighiero. 2020. “Mapping as a Contemporary Instrument for Orientation in Conferences.” In *Proceedings of the IX Annual Conference of the Association for Humanities and Digital Culture (AIUCD)*. Associazione per l’Informatica Umanistica e la Cultura Digitale.
- Piaget, Jean. 1975. *L’équilibration des structures cognitives: problème central du développement*. Études d’épistémologie génétique 33. Paris: Presses universitaires de France.
- Picca, Davide, Antonin Schnyder, Eri Kostina, et al. 2023. “Orchestrating Cultural Heritage: Exploring the Automated Analysis and Organization of Charles S. Peirce’s PAP Manuscript.” In *Proceedings of the 34th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media (HT ’23)*. New York: Association for Computing Machinery.
- Ricœur, Paul. 2005. *The Course of Recognition*. Translated by David Pellauer. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Rodighiero, Dario. 2018. “Mapping Affinities: Visualizing Academic Practice through Collaboration.” PhD diss., École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL).
- ———. 2021. *Mapping Affinities: Democratizing Data Visualization*. Open-Access English ed. Geneva: Métis Presses.
- Rodighiero, Dario, and Loup Cellard. 2019. “Self-Recognition in Data Visualization: How Individuals See Themselves in Visual Representations.” *EspacesTemps.net: Electronic Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences*, August.
- Rodighiero, Dario, Constance Crompton, and May Ning. 2020. “Lexical Cartography of DH2020.” metaLAB (at) Harvard & FU Berlin, August 31. [mlml.io/p/lexical-cartography-of-dh-2020](https://mlml.io/p/lexical-cartography-of-dh-2020/).
- Rodighiero, Dario, Frédéric Kaplan, and Boris Beaude. 2018. “Mapping Affinities in Academic Organizations.” *Frontiers in Research Metrics and Analytics* 3 (4).
- Rodighiero, Dario, and Alberto Romele. 2022. “Reading Network Diagrams by Using Contour Lines and Word Clouds.” In *Proceedings of Graphs and Networks in the Humanities*. Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.
- Rodighiero, Dario, Eveline Wandl-Vogt, and Elian Carsenat. 2021. “Making Visible the Invisible Work of Scientists during the COVID-19 Pandemic.” *Visual Culture Studies* (Milano; Udine) 2: 143–65. [doi:10.5281/zenodo.5115621](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5115621).
- Rodighiero, Dario, Eveline Wandl-Vogt, and Elian Carsenat. 2022. “A Visual Translation of the Pandemic.” *Leonardo* 55 (3): 297–303.
- Schrage, Michael. 2020. *Recommendation Engines*. Essential Knowledge Series. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Van der Maaten, Laurens, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. “Visualizing Data Using t-SNE.” *Journal of Machine Learning Research* 9 (86): 2579–2605. [jmlr.org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html](http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html).
- Von Glasersfeld, Ernst. 1992. “Why I Consider Myself a Cybernetician.” *Cybernetics and Human Knowing* 1 (1): 21–25.
- Wittgenstein, Ludwig. (1952) 2009. *Philosophical Investigations*. Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe et al. 4th ed. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
